everyone is stupid except me
exactly like the title i struggle
getting pissed off by everyone because i
feel like they're dumb and a bad
influence on me
i just graduated high school and
recently moved states for a job
opportunity i was good friends with a
co-worker at first we got along well but
the more i got to know them the less i
desired wanting to continue my
friendship with them they make impulsive
decision
cheat on their marriage partner and
recently disclosed to me how they can't
get their own apartment because they
have a bad credit score from so much
credit card debt
i want to help but fear i will lose
myself it's a bad investment of time
everyone else i meet seems to be a
functioning alcoholic and waste their
money i try to have deep philosophical
discussions with those i meet but either
no one is interested or they do this
thing where they pretend to be smart but
are riddled with logical fallacies
i ask someone why they believe religion
is a belief system but not the same for
concepts like time or physical science
and they respond with it just is
i struggle finding people i want to be
friends with because of this and they
have
and have spent the last few months
completely on my own just working on
myself my finances the gym and studying
but i'm so lonely that i've been really
depressed because of it
life feels pointless because it feels
like there's no one who shares the same
mindset i do
i know i'm not crazy smart i often feel
like an idiot and still struggle a lot
with being impulsive that's why
that's why i can't have impulsive
friends because that environment of peer
pressure led me to going through an
alcoholic phase of my own that i got out
of a few months ago i was throwing money
away on unfulfilling desires that i
didn't care about for the sake of saying
i have friends
my main goal is to get my do and use my
jobs opportunity to expand it into real
estate investments
i want to surround myself with people
who help push me towards my greatest
potential but i rarely meet anyone like
that
both of my parents are divorced and live
alone with little to no friends i come
from a racist country and a major
problem between us was me
dating outside my race to the point i
questioned having to cut them out for
the sake of their future grandkids
my mom is amazing and cared so much for
me but would constantly get upset and
angry at me for spending time with dumb
kids in high school
and to this day will tell me to stop
hanging out with someone when i tell her
about their problems
one of the few people i respect is my
dad he is incredibly smart and very
successful yet he suffers the same fate
of having absolutely no friends and
being impossible to live with due to
anger issues which is partially why i
moved out
i love him and he is really one of the
smartest people i know but i only have
bad memories of him getting upset at me
growing up for not understanding things
i swore to myself i would never end up
like him but find myself following his
footsteps
i mean no disrespect by the title but i
don't know how else to better phrase my
issue i want to stay friends with people
and help them but i am i just
compromising my own life
it's really hard for me to meet people
who i feel are productive and good
influences but i also don't know if i'm
being a cocky who is out of
touch with reality
okay what a good post
so
let's start with this
so this is someone who says
everyone else is dumb except for me
right so we see this all over the
internet
right you see this like people like to
find quotes of these people who are very
smart
and put them out of context or maybe in
context on places like
the subreddit i am very smart
and i want to have deeply philosophical
discussions
everyone around me is impulsive no one
is working towards their goals
i feel very lonely
and how do we respond to this person
generally speaking
no compassion
right so
on these places like the internet and in
life we say have compassion for all
people
accept people who think they're smarter
than everyone else
that's the one thing that you can say
that allows other people
to treat you like crap
right
if you've been traumatized by someone
else you deserve compassion
if your parents were narcissistic you
deserve compassion but if you think
you're better than me
screw you
let's make fun of you
let's
let's laugh at you
right
that's the one thing it's kind of
interesting
so i really respect this person because
this is a hard thing to say
right it's like hard to say and even
they're very like they're
self-reflective they've done some good
work and i think it's like it's amazing
that
already this person who is an i am very
smart person on the rest of the internet
would be treated like crap but already
in our community they've become a little
bit more self-reflective they've started
to realize like a little bit about
what's going on
and so
being very smart or feeling like you're
really smart is incredibly isolating
right and we we hear this a lot it's
hard for me to like meet people like
even and we make fun of people who think
they're smarter than everyone else
because they're like you know like
everyone else like can't debate
philosophy and like quantum mechanics
and philosophy and stoicism and whatever
buzzword you want nowadays
rick and morty fans perfect
so this experience first of all let's
like start from the top which is like
what this person is essentially talking
about is like isolation an immense
immense amount of isolation and
loneliness
and we can also see that this person is
making efforts right they're trying to
meet people they're trying to be nice
they're like worried though that if i
hang out with someone who's like in
credit card debt and cheats on their hus
on their their partner am i going to
wind up like hanging out with the wrong
people because
you know that that's not the direction i
want to go and they're like there's a
valid point there right
so what's going on here
like how do you end up in this space how
do you end up in the place where you
feel lonely
and you also feel like you're smarter
than everyone else and you tend to
reject everyone around you for not being
smart enough you reject everyone around
you because they're not moving you in
the direction that you need to go you
want to surround yourself with people
who challenge you
and like
want you want to push you to growth
right
so how did we get here and how do we get
out of it
so let's kind of take a look at this
okay
so
the first thing that i think everyone
here noticed so if you think you're
smarter than everyone else
and you're lonely
how do you overcome this
and and this is a good point right so
like the first thing that they kind of
say is that you should be careful with
who you hang out with right so not
everyone that you encounter is
necessarily going to be worth your time
that's kind of like logical
not everyone around you is going to be
like interested in the same things that
you are so you may not want to invest in
relationships like that's pretty logical
too
but i think there's a lot going on for
these people that i i think that they
don't realize
and
essentially what happens is since they
don't realize what's going on and they
put on a particular error they get
judged very harshly and like receive
essentially no compassion so the first
thing going on with this person is
conditioning
and this is something that if you've
been a part of this community for a
while like i don't need to point this
out to you
so this person judges other people for
not being good enough
what were they conditioned to do
right so if we kind of like talk about
their
mom um where's the section about their
mom
uh
so my mom isn't amazing and cared for me
so much so this person you respect her
right but would constantly get upset and
angry at me for spending time with gum
dumb kids so what does this mean
your mom
taught you
to be judgmental
and so you were ingrained right any time
he this person tried to make a friend
what did their mom say they're not the
right race
they're gonna hold you back
my gifted golden child
they're not the right people to hang out
with
they're not the right influence
my golden child
they're not as good as you
this is conditioning
we can see it like this person even says
like
you know
i want to help
right so he wants to help people he
wants to engage with people i'm assuming
it's a he for a second i don't know why
but
he or she wants to help people
right so this person wants to help
people but like what does their mind
tell them
like their mind is just incredibly
incredibly judgmental so the first thing
is that
you know if we kind of think about like
kids who grow up racist like why are
they racist is because of what they've
been conditioned to be
the second thing here is that this
person longs for connection
the main thing that they're feeling is
lonely
and when we we start to feel lonely
it's
that can manifest in all kinds of weird
ways and the loneliness can almost be a
protective mechanism so remember that
the things that hurt us in life that are
hard to kick are often doing something
for us otherwise we wouldn't do them so
our brain is really really good at
figuring out like
what's a good deal and what's a bad deal
and if you find yourself stuck in a
situation where you're torturing
yourself or you feel like you're lonely
and you can't make friends like there's
something else going on underneath the
surface
so the other thing to kind of point out
is we say like okay
the other reason that i kind of
mentioned connection here is they talk
about it as well
but you know what this person wants is
um
you know i try to have deep
philosophical discussions that's what
this person really wants so what they
want is the discussion
so they're not saying i want to read a
book they're not interested in knowledge
right what they're interested in is
discussion
and they're unable to find people who
can engage in discussion like for
whatever reason it just doesn't seem to
be they seem to be kind of
missing out on this
so a couple of things that are like
really important here
the next is when we have this sort of
system of enforced loneliness
and we are judgmental
when we are lonely due to judgmentalness
what's going on
a couple of things
okay the first is that
for people who have
problems with self-esteem
and wind up lonely
they sometimes will apply employ the
defense mechanism of
i'ma reject you
before you reject me
okay
so i'm gonna ask you all a question
what do you think what this person would
do
if they found someone who was able to
engage in a deep philosophical
discussion let's say that there was
someone who was like a phd student in
philosophy who really knew what they
were talking about
what do you think would happen
would the person engage with them
right it's interesting right so no one's
saying this person would be thrilled and
be like this is exactly what i'm looking
for
so there could be a really interesting
cognitive bias the only people i see are
like functional alcoholics like what
not everyone out there is a functional
alcoholic maybe you're hanging out in
the wrong places like it could be it
possible i'm not saying that you're not
encountering functional alcoholics like
maybe you're not hanging out at
university campuses and stuff like that
but i'd be really really careful about
what you do with what you're looking for
right it's very very terrifying because
if you're an amateur philosopher
who likes to smurf
in
with people who are in credit card debt
and like you meet someone you're like
because like there's a certain amount of
attacking going on here right so it's
like i ask why they believe religion is
a belief system but not the same for
concepts like
physical time or space it's like when
you're just pulling someone into that
conversation it's kind of interesting
right
it's like by the way do you think
religion is a belief system and they're
like sure
they're like what about science no like
science is fact
why
right someone is saying sir this is
wendy's exactly
so like how do you get into these
conversation like
you usually don't just like open up
there right so what i'm actually getting
is that this person has a deep desire to
be challenged and to challenge people in
return
right it's kind of like it's interesting
here but i think that what this what
this discussion aspect comes to is
actually what this person is really
looking for
is to challenge other people
and for that person to
live up to the challenge and in turn to
be challenged
does that make sense like that's what
like i wanna i wanna throw something out
and i want you to push back and i want
you to push back properly
but basically like it's like this person
is going around in real life and like
throwing down to 1v1 mid
it's like they're just showing up places
they're like hey let's 1v1 mid it's like
people aren't quite ready for that right
it's like
this is like real life 1v1 meeting
right debate bro yeah
but but there's even though we kind of
make fun of this person right like let's
remember that we want to try to be
compassion and understand that what this
person is really looking for is to
challenge and to be challenged which in
turn i think comes down to respect
because what this person really wants is
to be respected in a relationship and to
respect someone else in a relationship
and this is where some of this stuff
comes in because if you're kind of
feeling lonely you got to be careful
because you could be employing this
defense mechanism of i'm reject you
before you reject me
what else is going on when you're lonely
and judgmental
option number two on the differential
diagnosis
is we hate in others
that
which
we
cannot
fix
in ourselves
[Music]
if you find yourself rejecting a
particular class of people
there's a decent chance that the reason
you reject them
in the realm in the vein of screw you
specifically is because of something
within yourself
right
so
let's kind of look at it seems like
everyone i meet is a functioning
alcoholic and wastes their money
peer pressure led me to going through an
alcoholic phase of my own and i was
throwing money away
does that sound like anyone we know
right and this is also like i also say
it in kind of a meme sense but let's be
clear
this is almost a survival mechanism
because if you are
if this has happened to you
what is the lesson that your brain is
going to learn
steer clear
of
functional alcoholics who waste their
money
right
because you got pulled into this once
before it's actually very logical
but at the same time you got to be very
careful because if you're rejecting a
class of people
which is exactly what you yourself
suffered from
then like you've got to be kind of
careful from that right because a lot of
that rejection is then so people will
talk about things like projection
or displacement
a reaction formation
so what do these things mean
so projection is when you know if i'm
cheating on my spouse
i will be paranoid and i will like be
like thinking like you're cheating on me
aren't you you're cheating on me aren't
you it's like actually coming from me
but i project it out onto other people
the other thing that could happen is
displacement where i'm truly angry with
myself
for falling for this crap
but i'm taking the anger that i have
towards myself and i'm displacing it
onto other people like those functional
alcoholics those dumbasses they're so
such terrible people
and then reaction formation is somewhat
similar so like the best example that i
have of reaction formation
is the homophobic homosexual
so some people grow up in a particular
environment where they are taught to
hate something
or they're taught about homosexuality
and how homosexuality is bad and they
themselves are homosexual and so the
only way they can like manage those
feelings is to lash out against other
homosexuals
right so we hate in others that which we
cannot fix in ourselves
so that could be going on here too
um
okay
so the next thing is
if you're having trouble engaging in
relationships
if you're lonely
so what we hear in this post is
what this person wants
right like this is where
i want to meet people but no one is
interested or they want to do things
where they pretend to be smart but are
riddled with logical fallacies i don't
think they pretend to be smart i think
they
you know you just engage them in
conversations maybe they pretend to be
smart who knows like maybe they're
insecure too
but if you want to have a relationship
with someone and your problem is
loneliness a relationship is two ways
right a relationship goes both ways so
the question is what do they want
this is where if you want to have a
relationship you may say like okay i
don't want those things
but like
no relationship is going to be exactly
what you want right that's not even a
relationship like
like
maybe you're looking for someone and
this maybe you're looking for someone
who wants the same things you want which
is possible
but i think there's needs to be some
kind of acknowledgement if you're if
you're lonely about like what's the
other person's perspective like what do
they want from relationship
and is it impossible for you to engage
with someone
who
doesn't want what you want or can you
engage with them anyway and maybe give
them something that they want because
maybe if they do that
they'll give you what you want right
there's like an exchange in
relationships which i'm not really
getting much of the interesting thing is
that i think that this person does do
this
so
it's kind of interesting because if you
really talk about this example like good
friends with a co-worker at first we got
her along well
they make impulsive decisions i want to
help them so we see those elements there
of like meeting people where they're at
supporting them in their own challenges
all these kinds of things but then i
think this conditioning and all this
other crap gets in the way so the right
stuff is there
right but there's this weird kind of
conditioning where he's been taught to
be judgmental or she's been taught to be
judgmental
and and then like they're maybe afraid
of being rejected and they maybe like
see negative parts of themselves in that
other person which causes them to push
people away
right
and then we kind of get to the last
thing which is
we try to
fix
our
internal problems
by surrounding ourselves
with the opposite
so this is kind of related to
um
you know this point here
but if i am impulsive and
you know like
not disciplined
and vulnerable to alcoholism
then i think i can fix that by
surrounding myself with like phd
students right who are like into
philosophy
and there is some truth to this
so you want to be careful like for
example if you're trying to get sober
right they're like very powerful social
capital and community effects you don't
want to hang out with a bunch of people
who are actively using if you're trying
to get sober there's a lot of like good
reasonableness here
but at the same time be a little bit
careful because a lot of these problems
you're going to take with you right
surrounding yourself
with people who are like you know the
opposite of what you are
can absolutely have a good influence on
you but it is not going to fix the
problem
ultimately if you're impulsive
and like prone to alcohol those are
things that need to be internally fixed
but internally fixed in a supportive
environment and that's where the
environment kind of comes in right
that's why you have sober houses
because it's easier to work do the
internal work when you're externally
supported so i'd absolutely
recommend that this person you know
finds a different company like that's
totally fine like if you want to go hang
out with phd students
at your local university go for it but
be careful about you know this business
over here because what you may find is
that oh like
your mind may be looking for a way to
dismiss them
that's what you have to be super careful
about
because you may be finding some of the
stuff that you actually want but your
mind may be dismissing it because deep
down it's afraid of like being the
stupidest kid in the room
right and this is where i would start to
ask questions like
you know when your mom was there anyone
that your mom did want you to be friends
with and how did you feel
like hanging around them
what was it like being around people who
are smarter than you better than you
faster than you
you know better looking than you
because there's a lot of stuff here that
i think is conditioning there's a lot of
stuff here that i think you could be
like
you know displacing on to other people
but the truth of the matter is that
people who are
you know feel like they're smarter than
everyone else are
incredibly lonely
and like i know that the internet loves
to hate on people who think they're
smarter than everyone else but the truth
is like they're just as deserving of our
compassion as anyone else right we're
just being judgmental and there's just
one thing that we find particularly
annoying
right it's like the i am very smart
people and the karen's
and so like it's just really hard to
have compassion for some of these people
and at the same time i think that this
person has done an awesome job because
as we get as you know we start here and
everyone's like screw this person
and then as we get down to the the
bottom it's like yeah you know i mean no
disrespect by the title
i don't know how to better phrase my
issue they're just being authentic right
i want to say with friends but i'm just
am i compromising my life it's really
hard for me to meet people who i feel
are productive and good influences but i
don't know if i'm being a cocky
like this is an incredibly like humble
authentic representation of this
person's problem this person is
incredibly lonely
and so what do you do if you're in this
situation where you genuinely feel like
you cannot meet people
who like are giving you what you want
cannot challenge you you don't have
mutual respect in a relationship right
and this by the way so like
we'll get to that in a second so if
you're in this place i'd start with sort
of looking at your conditioning
where were you taught
to think like this
because chances are there's a lot of
judgment in your past
either in this case you are like your
mom literally told you don't hang out
with that person that person is stupid
is going to hold you back
or you are on the receiving end of the
judgment right or your mom called you
stupid and so you like learn to call
other people stupid we see this from
this person's dad too where the dad
doesn't know how to form relationships
so this person literally was not taught
how to form relationships
like that's a skill that most of us just
learn because our parents like have
relationships
and so when we're three years old and we
don't understand what's going on but my
dad has an argument with his best friend
and they start yelling at each other
and they just ignore me because they're
caught up in it but i'm still watching
it right it's still getting like laid
down in my brain in some way or shape or
form
so this person just was conditioned to
think this way
secondly they're incredibly lonely
right they're not looking for knowledge
they're looking for discussion they want
to be challenged
they want to challenge other people what
they're looking for is respect
but respect is mutual
and you can't have mutual respect unless
you respect the other person
and what i'm hearing is that when
there's judgment there's not a whole lot
of respect
so you're never going to have mutual
respect you're never going to have
relationship you have to start by
respecting the other person
right like if you want a friend if
you're lonely you need mutual respect to
have friendships but as long as you're
not respecting the other person then
like how's it ever gonna happen
another thing to be careful about is
that sometimes we hate in others that
which we cannot fix in ourselves
and we understandably want to avoid
those kinds of people because they're
bad influences
and so we try to surround ourselves
with the right people the opposite
but we can try to surround ourselves
with whoever we want to and those people
can absolutely be good influences but
the problems i'm going to carry with me
like you know
they're going to come with you to some
degree so you've got to work on that
and the last thing to kind of think a
little bit about is like what does the
other person want in the relationship
why don't you ask them why does a
relationship all have to have to all be
about your needs
so you start to go through some of these
things as you start to realize your
conditioning as you start to recognize
what some of your internal fears may be
maybe you're rejecting them before they
get a chance to reject you
right that could be going on
what actually happens
when you meet someone who challenges you
how do you actually respond to that
person
because you may want a couple things
maybe you just steer clear of them
subconsciously
or maybe you do all kinds of mental
gymnastics to be judgmental toward them
to knock them down a peg when they're
better at philosophical discussions than
you are
right it's very possible
and at the end of the day i don't think
that you have to be lonely if you're in
this situation you really don't
it's going to take some work and it's
going to be hard work
because this training does not happen
overnight right like you don't get to
this situation just randomly you get to
this situation when you've got two
parents
who've been really rough
in terms of teaching you how how to form
relationships
when you have when you like make friends
in this like when you're seven and your
mom is like that person isn't smart
enough for you like that sinks in deep
you've been programmed
so it's hard to undo that and how do you
start starts with mutual respect
it starts by thinking a little bit about
other people's needs exploring yourself
and then hopefully you can find what
you're looking for and by all means like
explore outside of your current domain
because maybe you just need to go to
different places right so there's some
very practical stuff too
right
questions
yeah rip gifted kids with parents like
that absolutely
someone's asking how do you deal with
conditioning in general beyond
recognizing it so be recognizing it is
actually like the lion's share of it so
if you
trust the yogis from like ancient india
they will say
recognizing it is sufficient
so the problem with conditioning is that
it's like an invisible monster right you
need detection
you need like a century ward or whatever
the law equivalent is like you need to
be able to detect your enemy to do
anything
so the brain is pretty good the mind is
pretty good at like making the right
choice the biggest problem is like a
problem of misdiagnosis
so once you figure out what the problem
is and you like you guys may have seen
this on stream we haven't done
interviews a whole lot recently but
you'll kind of see the cathartic moment
where someone realizes
and then the behavior follows suit
right there's even good evidence that
shows that there's this thing called the
insight trial which is super fascinating
which looked at the correlation between
insight and behavior so if you want to
see behavioral changes insight has to
come first and then the behavioral
changes seem to almost naturally follow
so you can definitely do things to
support the behavioral changes you can
operationalize you can find the right
kind of community you can do different
kinds of exercises but actually insight
is the most important thing
once you recognize that that is
conditioning then you can intervene with
it
in the moment
so if i go to let's say like a
philosophy club
and i'm aware if i i'm on the lookout
for these things and someone shows up
there
or even before i go it's like the day
for philosophy club is there i'm about
to get in my car and then suddenly my
mind is like oh why don't we just play
games like we can go next week
wait i thought you were lonely i thought
you wanted deep discussions like why are
you suddenly thinking about playing
games
like where's that thought coming from
right and as you begin to realize like
oh like and then you ask yourself the
question
how do i feel about going like pick up
your car keys walk out to your car
and then like notice that your heart
rate
is like
through the roof
you're tachycardic and you're sweating
and you're just like trying to get into
a car like what's wrong here
and then you realize like something is
up
right so awareness of conditioning is
critical and then once you become aware
of it then you can sort of realize like
oh this is me being afraid that like i'm
gonna be the stupid one in the
room and so am i willing to let that
fear take control of me it's okay if you
are you can say yes like that fear is
too much right now so be it
or i'm gonna set that fear aside and i'm
gonna try to go
right and then you start to condition
yourself in other ways
so neurons that
fire repeatedly get well grooved right
so if we want to understand how
conditioning works
it's kind of like a game trail in the
wilderness
so it starts off with a field of grass
that is equally is all the same
then a mouse
runs through the field and tramples a
little bit of grass
and then what happens is a rabbit is
approaches the field and sees oh there's
one area where the grass is a little bit
trampled so the rabbit runs across the
field rabbit's bigger than a mouse so it
tramples a little bit more grass
and then there's something like a
you know like a small deer
that walks across it because it sees an
area that's trampled
and then like a bigger deer crosses it
and then or another rabbit and then
another mouse and then suddenly you've
got a game trail that's the way your
neurons work
so when you're told by your mom over and
over and over again that these people
are not good enough for you you will
start to internalize that that is a
well-grooved set of neurons
neurons that fire together wire together
right so when you start to think in a
particular way all those neurons will
get connected and then all you have to
do is trigger one neuron and it'll
trigger everything down the path
so how do you start to do that it's the
same way you make a new game trail so in
a given moment in your life there's
gonna be an easy path which you've
walked a thousand times before
or there's a hard path
you have to walk through the grass and
that's gonna require more energy it's
gonna be more difficult
you recognize that right that's like
facing that fear in the moment that
you're going to go to the philosophy
club meeting
and so actually going to the meeting is
walking
creating a new game trailer we're not
even at a great game trail we're walking
through the tall grass and it requires
way more effort than going down the game
trail
the interesting thing though is the
second time you go to the philosophy
club meeting it's gonna be easier
because now there's a little bit of
trampled grass and then you do that a
second time and a third time and a
fourth time and then suddenly by the end
of it and i've seen this a ton in people
who are alcoholics for example
two years three years into sobriety they
don't even want to drink
so their neurons have been literally
rewired they've been reconditioned
but it all starts with awareness
right it all starts with awareness
you